
                      EXPLANATION FILE OF PROGRAM AKIMA
                      =================================


  Semi-Spline Interpolation
  ------------------------- 

    The spline curve-fitting technique has been in use for quite some time and
  has found considerable application in the design of ship hulls and airplane
  structures. The method as originally practiced consisted of plotting the va-
  lues, laying that plot on a board, and sticking pins in the calculated points
  (the table values, or knots). A thin strip of wood was then bent so as to con-
  forrn to the pins and to span the space between them. Because the natural cur-
  ve shape for a sirnply supported, end-loaded light beam is a cubic, you would
  expect a spline to fit a cubic function perfectly. Therefore, this forrn of
  spline fitting can be considered a third-order interpolation algorithrn in so-
  me ways sirnilar to the Lagrange and Newton rnethods. 

    The spline-fitting algorithm also has the subtle property that it minimizes
  the following integral:

                        d²p   d²f  2            f(x) = true function
              D = Sum [ --- - --- ]  dx  where                       (5.5.1)
                        dx²   dx²               p(x) = fitted curve

  If the true function, f(x), is a cubic, then the spline fit obviously minimi-
  zes D because f(x) = pix), but then so do the other cubic interpolation formu-
  lae that we have already discussed. For functions beyond the cubic, the spline
  fit is a little different in its behavior. It tends to minimize net curvature
  (elastic beams do not like kinks) while still passing through all the table
  values. 

    As might be expected intuitively, the bending of the spline is influenced by
  distant points, although the coupling is weaker the further away those points
  are. This distant coupling is necessary to minimize D. ln summary, the spline
  technique is a cubic interpolation scheme which gives the same results (in
  principle) as the corresponding Lagrange and Newton cubic formulas for func-
  tions of the third degree and lower. However, for higher-order functions, the
  spline fit does not simply reflect the Taylor series expansion, but minimizes
  net curvature instead. A later example will clearly demonstrate and reinforce
  this difference. 

    Akima (see Applied Numerical Methods course notes, University of Michigan, 
  1978) developed a cubic interpolation technique that approximates the spline
  properties. It is calculated in a manner vaguely similar to the Newton
  divided-differences method. It is less coupled to distant points than a true
  spline fit, but the effect is not severe. Its chief advantage is that it is
  much faster in execution than exact spline interpolation algorithms, which
  involve time- and memory-consuming matrix operations. 

    The development of the background mathematics for Akima's algorithm is be- 
  yond the scope of this discussion. The resulting subroutine is given in pro- 
  gram Akima. The input/output characteristics of the Akima subroutine are very
  similar to those of the earlier two interpolation programs. Again, the inputs
  are the number of table values, V, the values themselves, X(I) and Y(I), and
  the interpolation point, X. The interpolated result is returned in Y. An error
  flag, N, is also returned. If N is zero, the interpolation point was outside
  the allowable table range.
   
    In program Akima, an example is given of the operation of the Akima interpo-
  lation subroutine for the test function, sin x. The calculated results are
  approximately one order of magnitude more accurate than those observed for the
  corresponding Newton divided-differences example. The results are also appro-
  ximately one order of magnitude less accurate than those seen with the Lagran-
  ge interpolation example. It appears that the Akima subroutine suffers from
  round-off error, but the effect is moderate. 

    The key advantage to using AKIMA is its net curvature-minimization property. 
  This property is particularly apparent when dealing with discontinuous func-
  tions. For example, if the table represents a step function, then the results
  obtained using Newton and Akima interpolation are quite different. The Akima
  spline interpolation in this example is much better behaved than the corres-
  ponding Newton calculation. It is this particular feature of spline interpola-
  tion that has made the technique so popular. 

    The precautions regarding the use of AKIMA are few. First, the interpolation 
  requires three table values beyond the interpolation point; the range of the
  table must be wider than that of the interpolation. If this condition is vio-
  lated, N = 0 will be returned. The second precaution is to be aware of round-
  off error. If round-off error is suspected to be a problem, then you should
  consider using Lagrange interpolation. 

    In another section, we will consider the calculation of derivatives from ta-
  bles using the Lagrange interpolation formula (see file Lagrange.txt).

  From [BIBLI 01].
-----------------------------------------------
End of file Akima.txt
